# Introduction

This is one of those Saturdays where I am working on a "work project", and unfortunately don't have enough time to actually work on my hobby projects. :( The side-effect of all this is that I often have to wait for my work code to build and find myself just quickly checking up the news for interesting articles for which I will often-times bookmark to "read later". 

Instead of doing that today, allow me to actually write down why I'm working on this emulator project. 

## History

Even though it is 2019 now, I actually started this project in mid-2017 while my fiance (then girlfriend) was recovering from a major surgery. Having much time while I was taking care of her, paired with my intense interest in retro-gaming, I decided to take a stab at writing a video game console emulator.

The glaring challenge was that, I had no clue how to write a video game console emulator! The only real experience I had that was "close" to writing an emulator was through a few projects I had done in my Computer Architecture classes back in University. Even then, it was just building a simple CPU... not something that was actually release commercially with extreme success!

Since I started, I had been working on an off this project. First, learning the system architecture of the NES, then getting familiarity with its 6502 CPU. Getting stuck implementing the CPU, finally implementing the CPU, and then having no idea how to implement the PPU, then sort-of getting some PPU routines working, etc, etc. You get the idea. Unfortunately it has taken me this long to get to where you see this repository is at right now. :) 

Implementations started in:

1. Java
2. C
3. TypeScript/JavaScript (**Present**)

I've had many challenges along the way, but I make progress... just, very slowly. Because of the pace of the progress, I thought it might be handy to keep a journal of my journey through documentation. Everything I have learned about the NES and emulator development goes in here. It's all a WIP, but check back often and you might see new content here and there.

## Why???

In my opinion, writing an emulator is one of the most difficult projects a software developer can undertake.

There are other certain things that make writing emulators hard:

* Learning the system architecture of the platform to be emulated.
* Reverse engineering the behavior of each component through inspecting how code is executed, or reading tons of documentation available for the platform.
* Convincing oneself to think at the cycle-for-cyle level when it comes to executing code and writing to memory. Most software developers can get away without thinking this low-level.

All in all, expect a lot of difficult challenges along the way when getting started in writing an emulator.

Usually, the best advice given when Google searching: "How to write an emulator" is to start writing an emulator for some 8-bit microcomputer.

The Nintendo Entertainment System (yes, I'm American) is the system I have chosen for myself to try and emulate.


### References

* Nintendo Entertainment System Documentation - Version 1.0
    * Patrick Diskin
