# NES Technical Review

Of course, being an extremely popular home video game console, the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) is well documented. A lot of the information is accessible through online articles along with numerous discussions relating to the technical intricacies are discussed and documented in online forums.

The website that is most referenced for "all-things-NES" is [NesDev](https://nesdev.com). The [wiki](http://wiki.nesdev.com) and [forums](http://forums.nesdev.com) contain endless amounts of NES system information and how to program for it.

Regardless, I feel like it is only respectful to *at least* give a high-level overview, and discussion on the history, and hardware of the NES.

## History

Before the NES, and before the Famicom, Nintendo had experimented with several electronic game systems in the market, such as the "[Color TV Game](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Color_TV-Game)" series. These consoles were specific to a game itself, and no concept of interchangeable game cartridges yet. 

In addition to the Color TV Game series, Nintendo had also developed *[Donkey Kong](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donkey_Kong_(video_game))* and a variety of other arcade cabinet games that would eventually make its way to other home video game consoles such as the ColecoVision, and home computer systems such as the Apple II.

Taking a stab at the video game market, Nintendo had decided to develop their own home video game console, and launched it as the Famicom in Japan.

The system we know of as the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) began its life in Japan. Launched in July, 1983 in Japan, it made its way to North America in October, 1985, a full two years after the initial Japanese launch. The North American launch was met with much excitement, but was not trouble-free from the get-go.

At the time of its North American launch, the region had just experienced a [catastrophic video game crash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Video_game_crash_of_1983). Consumers at the time were very hesistant to purchase another video game console. However, due to the high-quality titles available in the NES library, the system avoided the same mistakes its contemporaries made: releasing quantity over quality when it came to video game titles. 

With higher quality titles being sold, and solid marketing campaigns, the NES was not only credited for reviving the video game industry in the US in the 1980s, but it also pioneered a lot of other now standard practices with regards to developing and publishing video games.

### Technical Choices

At the time of design, most video game consoles being sold such as the Atari VCS, ColecoVision, Invellivision and a few others were based off of 8-bit CPUs. The most popular CPU architecture being used at the time was the 6502 architecture designed by MOS technologies, which both the Atari and Nintendo used.

Originally, Nintendo wanted to go with a 16-bit CPU for the Famicom, but the company wanted to keep manufacturing costs down. As a result, the choice was to go with a variant of the MOS 6502 -- the 2A03 produced by Ricoh Technologies (2A07 for PAL). Along with the 2A03, Nintendo paired the CPU with a custom picture processing unit (PPU) dedicated handling all graphics work. 

The 2A03 was simply a cut-down MOS 6502. This made costs even cheaper and removed unnecessary components within the chip that Nintendo did not need for the Famicom to execute its instructions. Computationally, the Famicom was not much faster than the other 8-bit video game consoles in the market at the time. It was the audio and video capabilities of the Famicom that separated the system from the competition.

### Practices

One of the unique practices which Nintendo introduced as a "Seal of Quality". This brought the process of not allowing video game titles to be sold on the system unless prior authorization and terms with regards to distribution were in agreement with Nintendo.

Prior to the video game crash in North America in 1983, it was extremely easy to publish video games for existing systems such as the Atari VCS. Anything could be produced, and sold. These systems would then have a large library of video games, but as a consequence would have many low-quality titles. Thus, the seal of quality would be the solution to this problem.

In order to comply with the practice of obtaining rights to publish titles on the system, third party developers went through rigorous quality checks and testing with their games. 

Third party developers were restricted to only releasing just a few titles a year. There were also content restrictions in titles such as reducing the amount of adult-related themes within the game themselves.

In order to enforce all these restrictions and have an approved title bear the seal of qualit proudly, Nintendo had built a physical hardware lock-out chip (10NES) designed to disallow the loading of unapproved titles onto the system. 

### Marketing

Nintendo had not chose to market the Famicom in its original name for North America. Mostly due to avoiding any association and stigma with immediately being thought of as a "video game console", or a toy that could not be taken seriously. Nintendo of North America wanted to evoke an image of the console as more of an "entertainment system". 

In their initial marketing plans, Nintendo had wanted to partner up with Atari to distribute the game console. What stopped his from becoming reality was due to Atari's disapproval in seeing a Donkey Kong port being demoed in a Coleco Adam computer in the 1983 CES. By the time Atari and Nintendo had settled their differences, the North American video games market had crashed. 

Since Atari would no longer be a distributor, Nintendo had then taken upon themselves to sell the North American version of the Famicom. They renamed the console to be the Nintendo Advanced Video System, or *Nintendo AVS*. 

In early marketing and press material in the United States, the NES was marketed as a home computer, dubbed "AVS". It was completely redesigned from the Famicom's childish design of red and white plastic. What was replaced this scheme were shades of greys with intention of giving an interpretation of what the 1980s considered to be the "future. Eventually, this design was soon scrapped in favor of a simpler design -- the design which we all come to remember as the "toaster". 

Why Nintendo had redesigned the NES initially was due to the fact that North America did not have a thriving video game market after the crash. In fact, many retailers were hesistant to actually sell the system due to the video game crash which had occurred a couple years earlier. 

Thus, Nintendo had also used unique terminology to avoid the association of the NES console being a video games console. Instead of "cartridges", they were "game-paks". The video game console was then referred to as the "control deck".

Nintendo was initially strategic in its NES launch. Nintendo had performed a series of "test runs" in specific markets to gauge the interest of the NES by the American public. Initial test runs were promising and by 1986, Nintendo had sold 1.1 million consoles.

The NES continued to be sold in retail markets even after its successor, the Super NES was released in 1991. As far as 1993, Nintendo had even released a redesigned model of the NES. The model was the NES-101 which borrowed design paradigms, and acquired a similar aesthetic to the SNES. The NES-101 was then in retail markets as late as 1995, just a year before the Nintendo 64 was released! 

## Technical Specifications

|Information|Specifics|
|-----------|---------|
|CPU|Ricoh 2A03. A 8-bit MOS 6502 variant. (1.79 MHz NTSC/1.66 MHz PAL)|
|RAM|2 KB RAM, with addressable memory space of up to 64K addresses|
|PPU|5.37 MHz (this ran at 3x the speed of the CPU)|
||2 KB Video RAM, 256 B Sprite RAM, 32 B Palette RAM|
||64 colors with 52 being distinct.|
||256 x 240 resolution display|
|APU|5 sound channels|
||2 pulse wave channels (melodies)|
||1 triangle wave channel (voice)|
||1 sample channel|
|I/O|2 controller ports, and 1 (15-pin) expansion slot|


### References

1. Nintendo Entertainment System. Wikipedia. [Source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nintendo_Entertainment_System)
2. History of the Nintendo Entertainment System. Wikipedia. [Source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_Nintendo_Entertainment_System)
3. Video Game Crash of 1983. [Source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Video_game_crash_of_1983)
4. The NES turns 30: How it began, worked, and saved an industry. Andrew Cunningham. [Source](https://arstechnica.com/gaming/2013/07/time-to-feel-old-inside-the-nes-on-its-30th-birthday/)