# System Architecture

**This document is a WIP**

There are 3 main components to the NES. 

1. CPU - The brains of the system. Specifically, this is a Ricoh 2A03, based on a 6502 core running at about 1.79 MHz. 
2. APU - The audio processor to produce the sounds. There are 5 sound channels available. 2 square wave generators, 1 triangle wave generator, 1 noise generator and 1 sample output.
3. PPU - Clocked at 3x the CPU speed, the PPU outputs a 256x240 image 60 times per second. 

The CPU is based on a 6502 core, and is probably the most documented piece of the NES. Since many micro computers at the time, such as the Apple II used the 6502, there generally tends to be no shortage of information about how it works.

I recommend getting the book "Programming the 65816. Including the 6502, 65C02 and 65802"... It has all the details needed to implement each instruction. The challenge here for writing a CPU core is to just write the main fetch-decode-execute loop. 

Do we need to implement the unofficial opcodes? I have been able to get away with not and have ran quite a few games. So, depending on how much compatibiity you are looking for in your own emulator implementation, you can probably forego it.

The Ricoh 2A03 was the implementation of 6502 Nintendo ultimately ended up using. It of course famously lacked the binary-coded decimal mode, but had included an APU to generate sound. 

The APU executes a cycle for every CPU cycle executed. However it outputs a sample every other cycle. There are sound channels which are available to be used. Although only 4 digitized channels are used for generated sound. The last channel, DMC is used to output sound samples. DMC channel was rarely used as it required a lot of cartridge space along with CPU cycles to play back a sample. 

The PPU is a 2C02 chip running at 3 times the CPU speed. Each scanline consists of 341 cycles. The final image output by the 2C02 is a 256x240 image.

Two main types of memory:

1. CPU memory, addressable to 0xffff, but only 0x0800 work RAM available. The rest is allocated towards PRG ROM data, and the memory mapped registers. 
2. PPU memory, addressable to 0x3fff. 

Internally, PPU also has 256 bytes of memory for sprites, and 64 bytes for palette memory.

[NES diagram here]

NES shares a common data bus. This data bus is 8 bit and therefore can only work with 1 byte at a time. 

